\input texinfo
@setfilename mlg_lib.info
@settitle MLG Lib

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2017, 2019 Mike Gran
@end copying

@titlepage
@title MLG Lib
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c Output the table of the contents at the beginning.
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top

@top MLG Lib

This manual is for MLG Lib.

@menu
* The MLG utilities library::
* mlg assert::
* mlg bytevectors::
* mlg logging::
* mlg lists::
* mlg strings::
* mlg utils::
* C procedures::
* Index::                       Complete index.
@end menu

@end ifnottex

@node The MLG utilities library
@chapter The MLG utilities library

Every programmer has a list of library routines that they use often.
These are mine.  The @code{(mlg)} library is routines that seem somewhat
basic but are not in the standard library.

@node mlg assert
@chapter mlg assert

Here are some assert macros.  These are different in that they will
try to print the filename and line number along with their failure message

@deffn Syntax assert expression
If @var{expression} is @code{#f} this will call @code{error}.  The
error message will say 'assertion failed' and print the current
filename and line number.
@end deffn

@deffn Syntax assert-type type var
Given a symbol @var{type}, this syntax calls the predicate whose
name is @var{type} followed with a question mark, and prints an
assertion error on failure.

For example @code{(assert symbol 'foo)} will error if
@code{(symbol? 'foo)} evaluates to @code{#f}.
@end deffn

@node mlg bytevectors
@chapter mlg bytevectors
Here are some helper functions for working with bytevectors.

@deffn Procedure f32vector-max bytevector
Treating @var{bytevector} like a vector of 32-bit floats, this
returns the largest entry.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure subbytevector source source-start len
Given a bytevector @var{source}, a @var{source-start} location in the
bytevector, and the bytes required, this returns a newly allocated
bytevector containing that region of the source.
@end deffn

@node mlg logging
@chapter mlg logging
Every programmer in the world has written their own logging class.
This is mine.  It is largely stolen from GLib.

I had three goals when I put this together.

@enumerate
@item
The user can choose to log to @code{systemd}'s @code{journald}
and/or to the stdout/stderr.
@item
When logging to stdout/stderr, it should look and feel like
GLib's logging.
@item
It should have colors.
@end enumerate

The logger has six levels of output
@table @code
@item LOG_LEVEL_ERROR
errors and assertion failures
@item LOG_LEVEL_CRITICAL
critical warnings
@item LOG_LEVEL_WARNING
warnings
@item LOG_LEVEL_MESSAGE
important informational messages
@item LOG_LEVEL_INFO
informational messages
@item LOG_LEVEL_DEBUG
debug statements
@end table

By default, @code{LOG_LEVEL_ERROR} messages will cause the program to
exit.

By default @code{LOG_LEVEL_ERROR}, @code{LOG_LEVEL_CRITICAL},
@code{LOG_LEVEL_WARNING}, and @code{LOG_LEVEL_MESSAGE} messages are
printed, while @code{LOG_LEVEL_INFO} and @code{LOG_LEVEL_DEBUG} messages
are silently dropped.  The next section describes how to modify this
behavior.

@section Setting up the logger
There are a few ways to customize the output.

@subsection MESSAGES_DEBUG and the log domain
If you set a log domain using the @code{set-log-domain} procedure,
logging messages will print out the log domain string as part of each
message.  Setting a short log domain string can be useful if you are
sending logging messages from multiple modules or subsystem.

@code{LOG_LEVEL_INFO} and @code{LOG_LEVEL_DEBUG} messages are silently
dropped by default.  To have them output, you can do one of two things.
@itemize
@item
Set the @env{MESSAGES_DEBUG} environment variable to the string
@code{all}.
@item
Use the procedure @code{set-log-domain} to set the log domain to a
string, and then set the @env{MESSAGES_DEBUG} environment variable to a
string that contains the log domain string.
@end itemize

@deffn Procedure set-log-domain str
@deffnx Procedure get-log-domain
Sets or gets the current log domain. @var{str} must be a string.
@end deffn

@subsection Enabling journald and console output

By default, the logger will sent messages both to @code{journald} and to
the console.  You can disable one or the other by using the
@code{log-set-stream-output} and @code{log-set-journal-output}
procedures

@deffn Procedure log-set-stream-output flag
@deffnx Procedure log-set-journal-output flag
Given a @var{flag} value, which must be @code{#t} or @code{#f}, these
procedures enable or disable the output of logging information to
stdout/stderr and to @code{journald} respectively.

If you disable both stream and journal output, no log information will
be generated, but, a message of @code{LOG_LEVEL_ERROR} will still end
the program.
@end deffn

@subsection Enabling color

By default, logging messages sent to the console will be colorized based
on the severity of the message.  This behavior can be modified by using
the @code{log-enable-color} procedure.

@deffn Procedure log-enable-color flag
Given a @var{flag} value, which must be @code{#t} or @code{#f}, this
procedure enables or disables color on console output.
@end deffn

@section Logging messages

These procedures can be used to generate logging output

@deffn Procedure log-error msg ...
@deffnx Procedure log-critical msg ...
@deffnx Procedure log-warning msg ...
@deffnx Procedure log-message msg ...
@deffnx Procedure log-info msg ...
@deffnx Procedure log-debug msg ...

These procedures generate a logging message of a given priority.
@var{msg} can either be a plain string, or it can be a @code{format}
string followed by additional arguments.

@code{log-info} and @code{log-debug} messages are dropped silently by
default unless the @env{MESSAGES_DEBUG} envirnoment variable and the log
domain have been set appropriately.
@end deffn

There are also specialized forms of the @code{log-domain} message that
may be useful.

@deffn Syntax warn-if-reached
If this syntax is called, it logs a critical warning message that this
code should not have been reached.
@end deffn

@deffn Syntax warn-if-used val
The syntax returns the @var{val} that was passed into it without
modification, and it generates a critical warning message that this
value should not have been used.
@end deffn

@deffn Syntax warn-if-false expr
If @var{expr} is false, this will log a critical warning message that
this value is false.
@end deffn

@deffn Syntax warn-val-if-used val
The syntax returns the @var{val} that was passed into it without
modification, and it generates a critical warning message if the value
is false.
@end deffn

@deffn Syntax log-debug-pk expr
The syntax returns the @var{expr} that was passed into it without
modification, and it generates a debug message giving the value of
@var{expr}.
@end deffn

@deffn Syntax log-debug-locals
This syntax generates a debug message giving the values of all the local
variables at this position in the code.
@end deffn

@deffn Syntax log-debug-time
This syntax generates a debug message giving the number of seconds that
have passed since logging began
@end deffn

@node mlg lists
@chapter mlg lists

@deffn Procedure list-range-check-n? list n low high
Return @code{#t} if the first N elements in the list is between
@var{low} (inclusive) and @var{high} (inclusive).  If the list has fewer
than N elements, check all the elements in the list.
@end deffn

@node mlg strings
@chapter mlg strings

@deffn Procedure string-ensure-single-newline str
This returns a copy of @var{str} with any newlines, linefeeds,
NELs, and Unicode line and paragraph separators removed.  A single
newline is appended to the end of the string.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure string-append-map f lst
Equivalent to @code{(apply string-append (map f lst))}.  Maps the
procedure @var{f} of the elements of a list of strings @var{lst},
appending the results together as a single string.
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure string-ref-safe str i
Returns the character in the string @var{str} at position @var{i}, or
@code{#\null} on error.
@end deffn


@node mlg utils
@chapter mlg utils

The bulk of this module is procedures that search for special directory
locations, plus a couple of other random bits.

@deffn Procedure search-path-separator-string
This returns ``;'' on Windows or ``:'' otherwise.  This string is the
conventionally used separator in lists of paths, such as
@example
/usr/local/share:/usr/share
@end example
@end deffn

@deffn Procedure get-system-data-dirs
Returns the preference-ordered set of base directores to search for
data files.  This does not include the user's data directory.  The
return is a list of strings of directory names.
@end deffn

@deffn Procecure find-data-file filename
Searches for a file named @var{filename} in the user's data directory
and the system data directories.  @var{filename} may be a relative path
like @code{path/fname}. The directories are searched in preference
order: the user's data directory is searched, then the system data
directories.  The first matching filepath is returned as a string.  If
no matching file is found, @code{#f} is returns.

This procedure does not recursively search subdirectories.
@end deffn

@node C procedures
@chapter The Ryu C-like procedures library

This is a library of procedure that are intentionally similar to C
procedures.  This library is partly a dumb joke and partly a useful
utility to make porting from C easier.

@defun Macro assert condition
Given @var{condition}, if @var{condition} evaluates to @code{#f},
this raises an error with key @code{'misc-error} and a message
constructed by displaying @var{condition}.

If there is a variable in scope named @code{NDEBUG} which is
not @code{#f}, this macro does nothing.
@end defun

Note that there is also a more expansive assertion macro in
@code{(rnrs base)} but it throws the sometimes-more-awkward R6RS
exception.

@cindex index entry, another

Here is a numbered list.

@enumerate
@item
This is the first item.

@item
This is the second item.
@end enumerate

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye


